ME 535 Winter 2023

# Homework 1

Due Fri. 20 January 2023

__This is an individual assignment, so the answers you submit must be your own work.__

Download the file `h1_template.py`, and insert your answers as code or strings (depending on the problem). 

Before you upload the file to Canvas, execute the final version of the file to make sure that it runs properly and produces your intended answers.

0) Work through the "Ch1_intro" notebook as you read through Ch. 1 in the text. (You do NOT need to turn anything in for this problem.)

> The problems below aim to help you build your python skills while exploring basic concepts underlying numerical methods.

1) Consider a 1-byte floating-point system with 1 sign bit, 4 precision bits (for the mantissa), and 3 exponent bits corresponding to: $\beta=2, p=4, e \in \{-4,-2,-1,0,1,2,3\}$. 
In the template file, insert code to implement the `digits_to_num` function that computes the represented number corresponding to a specific set of parameter values. Assume that all input values are of the appropriate type (i.e., `digits` is an array of integers and the other arguments are integers).
The `p1()` function will call your implementation to produce values including the largest and smallest representable values? What should those values be? Check that your code produces the appropriate values.

2a) Insert code in the template file to implement the `mini_gamut` function to produce the array of representable values associated with exponent `e=0` (for base `beta=2`). 

2b) Insert code to implement the `positive_gamut(e_min, e_max)` function to produce the gamut of positive representable values. (Use `e_min=-4` and `e_max=3` as in Problem 1.)

2c) Insert code to implement `gamut(e_min, e_max)` that returns a sorted array of all representable values for the system of Problem 1 (for base `beta=2`). 
Function `p2()` will execute your functions to test how they work. 

3) Fill in code in the template to implement the function `round_value(val, gamut)`. Given the gamut of representable values as a numpy array, the function should return the value in the gamut array that is closest to the input `val`. Use the gamut generated by the function you implemented in Problem 2c. 
The function `p3()` will execute your function to test how it works.

4a) Insert code in the template file to implement the function `gamut_linspace(count, gamut)`. This function should return an array of `count` values equally spaced over the range from the minimum value to the maximum value in the gamut.

4b) Insert code in the template file to implement `round_values(vals, gamut)` that accepts an input array and returns a corresponding array of rounded values in the gamut. 

4c) Use `plot_rounded_error(vals, rounded_vals)` along with the functions from 4a and 4b to generate an array of 1000 values and 1000 rounded values and plot the relative and absolute errors between the rounded and unrounded results.  `plot_rounded_error` is mostly implemented, you only need to
implement the error computations. Use the gamut generated from problem 2. Function p4()` will execute and test your code. 

5) What is the value of $\epsilon_M$ for this floating-point system. Explain how it plays a prominent role in one of the plots. Insert your response as a string to replace "YOUR ANSWER HERE" in the `p5()` function. 
6) Do problem 3.4 from Schorghofer. Insert you answer as a string in a print statement in function `p6()`. 
